A Digital Platform for Community-Supported Animal Conservation 
 
BACKGROUND 
The Problems 
Badan Pusat Statistik, the Indonesian Bureau of Statistics, has recently published data on the 
country’s endangered endemic species. Despite spending millions of dollars on conservation 
efforts, the government might have not seen any significant breakthroughs in the population 
of some species. The success of Komodo has been largely exclusive, and the world is now left 
with merely less than 100 Sumatran Tigers, Javan Rhinoceros, Bali Mynas, Javan Eagles, 
Tarsius, and Celebes Crested Macaques, respectively. Habitat loss remains the primary cause 
of the problems. Other causes include habitat changes, commercial over-exploitation, the 
introduction of harmful non-native species, pollution, and the spread of diseases. 
 
 
 
The Vision 
Nevertheless, people have started to realize that this is not just the government’s struggle 
and that communities play an important role in the initiative. Local communities, especially, 
are the primary stakeholders in such a conservation project, and their involvement is crucial 
©Manik Hapsara 08/2023 
to its success. In 2022, Yayasan Komodo (the Komodo Foundation), a not-for-profit 
organization, was given a substantial amount of funds to initiate the development of a 
revolutionary digital platform for animal conservation in Indonesia. The proposed digital 
platform, Komodo Hub, is expected to be fully operational by the end of 2024. Komodo Hub 
will be the national standard for a conservation digital tool to explore, identify, and protect 
Indonesian endemic species, educate people about animal conservation, and endorse the 
involvement of communities. 
Image source: The Internet 
Yayasan Komodo has envisioned Komodo Hub to be available to citizens nationwide, from 
remote indigenous communities to regional towns and urban areas. They aim to involve 
REQUIREMENT COLLECTION 
communities and primary schools in the protection and promotion of domestic endangered 
species. The digital platform will provide registered and non-registered users equal 
opportunity to access the rich knowledge base of Indonesian endangered endemic species 
and get involved in a broad range of conservation programs. Komodo Hub will allow 
registered users to further extend its knowledge base by sharing their records of the species. 
The following are some interviews conducted during the inception phase. In reality, the 
requirement collection might have involved more stakeholders and potential system users. 
However, for the sake of clarity and simplicity